The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventure of the Dying Detective, by 
Arthur Conan Doyle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Adventure of the Dying Detective

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Posting Date: October 23, 2008 [EBook #2347]
Release Date: October, 2000
[Last updated: March 10, 2011]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURE OF DYING DETECTIVE ***




Produced by David Brannan.  HTML version by Al Haines.









The Adventure of the Dying Detective


By

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle




Mrs. Hudson, the landlady of Sherlock Holmes, was a long-suffering
woman.  Not only was her first-floor flat invaded at all hours by
throngs of singular and often undesirable characters but her remarkable
lodger showed an eccentricity and irregularity in his life which must
have sorely tried her patience. His incredible untidiness, his
addiction to music at strange hours, his occasional revolver practice
within doors, his weird and often malodorous scientific experiments,
and the atmosphere of violence and danger which hung around him made
him the very worst tenant in London.  On the other hand, his payments
were princely. I have no doubt that the house might have been purchased
at the price which Holmes paid for his rooms during the years that I
was with him.

The landlady stood in the deepest awe of him and never dared to
interfere with him, however outrageous his proceedings might seem.  She
was fond of him, too, for he had a remarkable gentleness and courtesy
in his dealings with women.  He disliked and distrusted the sex, but he
was always a chivalrous opponent. Knowing how genuine was her regard
for him, I listened earnestly to her story when she came to my rooms in
the second year of my married life and told me of the sad condition to
which my poor friend was reduced.

"He's dying, Dr. Watson," said she.  "For three days he has been
sinking, and I doubt if he will last the day.  He would not let me get
a doctor.  This morning when I saw his bones sticking out of his face
and his great bright eyes looking at me I could stand no more of it.
'With your leave or without it, Mr. Holmes, I am going for a doctor
this very hour,' said I.  'Let it be Watson, then,' said he.  I
wouldn't waste an hour in coming to him, sir, or you may not see him
alive."

I was horrified for I had heard nothing of his illness.  I need not say
that I rushed for my coat and my hat.  As we drove back I asked for the
details.

"There is little I can tell you, sir.  He has been working at a case
down at Rotherhithe, in an alley near the river, and he has brought
this illness back with him.  He took to his bed on Wednesday afternoon
and has never moved since.  For these three days neither food nor drink
has passed his lips."

"Good God!  Why did you not call in a doctor?"

"He wouldn't have it, sir.  You know how masterful he is.  I didn't
dare to disobey him.  But he's not long for this world, as you'll see
for yourself the moment that you set eyes on him."

He was indeed a deplorable spectacle.  In the dim light of a foggy
November day the sick room was a gloomy spot, but it was that gaunt,
wasted face staring at me from the bed which sent a chill to my heart.
His eyes had the brightness of fever, there was a hectic flush upon
either cheek, and dark crusts clung to his lips; the thin hands upon
the coverlet twitched incessantly, his voice was croaking and
spasmodic.  He lay listlessly as I entered the room, but the sight of
me brought a gleam of recognition to his eyes.

"Well, Watson, we seem to have fallen upon evil days," said he in a
feeble voice, but with something of his old carelessness of manner.

"My dear fellow!" I cried, approaching him.

"Stand back!  Stand right back!" said he with the sharp imperiousness
which I had associated only with moments of crisis. "If you approach
me, Watson, I shall order you out of the house."

"But why?"

"Because it is my desire.  Is that not enough?"

Yes, Mrs. Hudson was right.  He was more masterful than ever.  It was
pitiful, however, to see his exhaustion.

"I only wished to help," I explained.

"Exactly!  You will help best by doing what you are told."

"Certainly, Holmes."

He relaxed the austerity of his manner.

"You are not angry?" he asked, gasping for breath.

Poor devil, how could I be angry when I saw him lying in such a plight
before me?

"It's for your own sake, Watson," he croaked.

"For MY sake?"

"I know what is the matter with me.  It is a coolie disease from
Sumatra--a thing that the Dutch know more about than we, though they
have made little of it up to date.  One thing only is certain.  It is
infallibly deadly, and it is horribly contagious."

He spoke now with a feverish energy, the long hands twitching and
jerking as he motioned me away.

"Contagious by touch, Watson--that's it, by touch.  Keep your distance
and all is well."

"Good heavens, Holmes!  Do you suppose that such a consideration weighs
with me of an instant?  It would not affect me in the case of a
stranger.  Do you imagine it would prevent me from doing my duty to so
old a friend?"

Again I advanced, but he repulsed me with a look of furious anger.

"If you will stand there I will talk.  If you do not you must leave the
room."

I have so deep a respect for the extraordinary qualities of Holmes that
I have always deferred to his wishes, even when I least understood
them.  But now all my professional instincts were aroused.  Let him be
my master elsewhere, I at least was his in a sick room.

"Holmes," said I, "you are not yourself.  A sick man is but a child,
and so I will treat you.  Whether you like it or not, I will examine
your symptoms and treat you for them."

He looked at me with venomous eyes.

"If I am to have a doctor whether I will or not, let me at least have
someone in whom I have confidence," said he.

"Then you have none in me?"

"In your friendship, certainly.  But facts are facts, Watson, and,
after all, you are only a general practitioner with very limited
experience and mediocre qualifications.  It is painful to have to say
these things, but you leave me no choice."

I was bitterly hurt.

"Such a remark is unworthy of you, Holmes.  It shows me very clearly
the state of your own nerves.  But if you have no confidence in me I
would not intrude my services.  Let me bring Sir Jasper Meek or Penrose
Fisher, or any of the best men in London.  But someone you MUST have,
and that is final.  If you think that I am going to stand here and see
you die without either helping you myself or bringing anyone else to
help you, then you have mistaken your man."

"You mean well, Watson," said the sick man with something between a sob
and a groan.  "Shall I demonstrate your own ignorance? What do you
know, pray, of Tapanuli fever?  What do you know of the black Formosa
corruption?"

"I have never heard of either."

"There are many problems of disease, many strange pathological
possibilities, in the East, Watson."  He paused after each sentence to
collect his failing strength.  "I have learned so much during some
recent researches which have a medico-criminal aspect.  It was in the
course of them that I contracted this complaint.  You can do nothing."

"Possibly not.  But I happen to know that Dr. Ainstree, the greatest
living authority upon tropical disease, is now in London.  All
remonstrance is useless, Holmes, I am going this instant to fetch him."
I turned resolutely to the door.

Never have I had such a shock!  In an instant, with a tiger-spring, the
dying man had intercepted me.  I heard the sharp snap of a twisted key.
The next moment he had staggered back to his bed, exhausted and panting
after his one tremendous outflame of energy.

"You won't take the key from me by force, Watson, I've got you, my
friend.  Here you are, and here you will stay until I will otherwise.
But I'll humour you."  (All this in little gasps, with terrible
struggles for breath between.)  "You've only my own good at heart.  Of
course I know that very well.  You shall have your way, but give me
time to get my strength.  Not now, Watson, not now.  It's four o'clock.
At six you can go."

"This is insanity, Holmes."

"Only two hours, Watson.  I promise you will go at six.  Are you
content to wait?"

"I seem to have no choice."

"None in the world, Watson.  Thank you, I need no help in arranging the
clothes.  You will please keep your distance.  Now, Watson, there is
one other condition that I would make.  You will seek help, not from
the man you mention, but from the one that I choose."

"By all means."

"The first three sensible words that you have uttered since you entered
this room, Watson.  You will find some books over there. I am somewhat
exhausted; I wonder how a battery feels when it pours electricity into
a non-conductor?  At six, Watson, we resume our conversation."
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
